# 2023-10-30

Within image recognition the image is mostly broken up in its corresponding RGB value per pixel or per segment to make it readable by a model.

Because there  are also other ways to create color used like, HSL, HSD, CMYK, YIQ, YUV sometimes a conversion is necessary from these color values back to RGB. Each of these patterns has a unique way to calculate this.

It is important per use case which **color space** is used so this conversion can be done.

When using color in a histogram it is good to transform the data by “stretching” the historgram so that a low percentage of the histogram is lost but the peaks are maintained and enlarged.

**Shape normalization** is used to place the part to be meassured to the center of the image. Think about using rotation, scaling, translating and mirroring.

The calculation of the rotation is done by getting the main axis of the object and seeing if they align with the optimal axis and then rotate them accordingly.

There are also **image filtering** methods which can be used to improve the image quality these are

- Mean filter: for noise reduction, takes the rgb values of the surrounding pixels and makes the targetted pixel the mean of these values
- Median filter: for noise reduction, takes the rgb values of the surrounding pixels and makes the targetted pixel the median of these values
- Gaussian smoothing: takes the colors of near pixels and generates a color of the current pixel based on the near pixels by taking a small percentage from the furthest and a high percentage of the closest (surrounding) pixels.
- Discrete image gradients: To calculate the derivative to use this function take the difference between the pixel and the next pixel to the right for $\partial x$ and to the bottom for $\partial y$