# 2024-03-18

This lecture is about server crashes and how to handle them. There are multiple ways to handle a server crash but important things to keep in mind is that data and state needs to be kept so it can be restored and reused on restart.

The RPC model within distributed systems is the call of a function on another machine RPC stands for **Remote Procedure Call**. RPC is great for abstraction so every system only gets to do a specific set of tasks.

RPC aims to achieve a couple of goals:

- Binding: which is the connection between the caller and the location where the functionality is run
- Transparency: it should be unknown for the caller that the function is being run on a different machine.
- Concurrency: the server should be able to handle multiple calls concurrently
- Heterogeneity: it should not matter what each system uses for it’s hardware, OS, etc.

Using this system is very good for abstracting away systems that become to wide in what actions they perform. WIth an RPC architecture each system can perform a specific set of actions.

This can fail however when a node crashes or a response is not send for other reasons than crashing.

RMI takes this a step further and does not only share methods and function but also data across multiple machines. For instance an instance of a class can live in different memory on the same or another machine.

With RPC there are different strategies to call the function and expect the result. This mostly matters when the result is not received. The call strategies or more commonly known as the **Call semantics** are:

- At least once: calls the server at least once and on failure after a timeout sends another request. The server where the request is send to will start another procedure. This works well when executing something more than once is not a problem.
- At most once: also calls the server again on failure but the server assigns an ID after the first call and just returns the status on the second call. This is useful for processes where it does matter if it is run multiple times, like decrementing a value or something.
- Exactly once: like at most once this guarantees that a process is not run twice but it is stricter about also running it on failure. This makes it complex since on failure it needs to have stored it’s status and be able to restart where it left off after restart.
- Maybe or possibly once: this is the simplest but least reliable. The client sends a request to the server but does not know if this causes one or multiple processes to be started.

When using distributed systems shared memory space is important when running multiple instances with the same work.

## Replication

For repplication there are multiple strategies. The most basic one is mirroring which means that server are constantly updated to contain the same data across all servers.

Other ways are to manage data on multiple servers and store all their data on one big server.

The challenges with replication are the following

- Consistency: how to keep the data consitent across all replications
- How many replicas are needed and where to put them
- How to decide which replice servers which client

These problems can be fixed by a replica manager. This manager orchestrates that chanes are written to other replicas.