# 2024-03-04

## Vertical distribution

A vertical distribution refers to a distributed system where each layer has it’s own task think about the very common, client, server, database distribution. The advantage of this distribution is that each layer can be scaled independently, think for instance of scaling a server to handle more requests from clients.

## Horizontal distribution

A horizontal distribution refers to a dsitributed system where all layers perform the same task. The key difference is that the interface of a horizontal system is just a single interface where within a vertical distribution it works with multiple interfaces.

## Horizontal vs vertical distribution

Horizontal distributions work with systems that have the same functionality, where vertical distributions aims to scale the system in a way where each system handles a separate part of the chain.

## Combined distribution

A very powerful method is to combine the two, so firstly for instance splitting the database, server and client into separate layers and then scaling each layers with replication as needed. In most cases this is for instance scaling a server to more instances on high load.

## Peer to peer

The peer to peer network works without a centralised node but with a system where each node requests but also supplies services.

### Random network

The most usual and well known way to structure a peer to peer network is with a random network. This is with each peer connecting to any peer to it needs information from

**Advantages**

- Robust again failures, no hubs can fail
- Efficient in very dynamic and changing envs

### Scale-free network

A more effictive way is with hubs. These hubs work by working as central hubs between different peers to make the communication more effective.

**Advantages**

- More efficient
- Less overhead

A way to create a managed peer to peer network is also a **Superpeer network** this is a network with a couple of general servers where everyone connects with it. This is a normal classic server client network because the superpeers are most often servers that are purpose run for being the superpeer.

### Chunks

When using these kinds of network chunks become very important. This can spliit the load between different nodes. For instance when downloading a file that multiple peers offer separate chunks can be downloaded from each and then on the target system it can be combined to become a fully usable file!

# Stateful vs stateless

Stateful servers create a session for a user once they login, stateless server only provide a token with which the user can be reauthenticated on the next request.

## Stateful

Tracks for every user it’s session and within this session data is stored. This improves performance since with the session ID all the data can be fetched from memory. However with a lot of users this can cause a lot of memory to be used and when the server crashes all the data in the sessions is lost.

## Stateless

Stateless servers give the user a token which it can decipher but within this token all the data needs to be stored. The client is responsible for storing the token. This costs more data but makes a simpler server system which does not have to manage data of sessions.

# Code mobility

Code mobility decides what amount of functionality to delived to the user. High mobility means that the user has to perform a lot of the heavy lifting, this is done by a server that provides it with an application and only handles data changes for instance. A weak mobility design is the opposite and handles most of the heavy lifting for the user.

# Communication

Within a non-distributed system shared memory has to be used to make communication possible between two systems.

- Communication can also be done by sending messages between systems.

When sending messages there is almost always header information send with the request. This is to provide context of the data that was send. For instance a token or session id that refers to which user is performing the action.

## Alternating bit protocol

To not walk into the last confirmation problem where each node tries to acknowledge that it has received the others acknowledgement the sliding window protocol can be used reducing the amount from infinity to only about 20.

# Synchronous vs asynchronous

Synchronise requests mean that the thread will be blocked while waiting on a response, while asynchronise requests will perform other tasks and every so often check if a response has been delivered.

### Questions

- Can the combined distribution also be called this if it connects to a single database that does not get scaled horizontally?
- Single threaded processses can also be non-blocking right? Look at node.js
- Community hosted platform where community can ask for an amount of money per hour run and can compete.