# 2024-02-26

# Lecture 1: Introduction

Computers can be uniprocessor or multiprocessor. 

With multiprocessors the kernel handles the division of labour and the operating system has no overview of the amount of processors.

On the kernel level paging and memory allocation is done.

It is important to know what paging is.

There are different ways to configure operating systems over multiple machines. The simplest way is a system where every computer has it’s own kernel and OS but a distributed application. It is however also possible to have a system with a distributed OS. The challenge here is letting the system know where each piece of memory or instruction lives.

A distributed system is a system using multiple devices to run a process.

### Middleware

A middleware service aims to make it easier to unify systems with multiple different operating systems. It is nowadays the most common way to run a distributed system.

The goals of the middleware are:

- is to offer a single interface for all distributed resources
    - Giving a uniform view of all the distributed systems
- Improve transparency
- Providing some service for security or naming within the network

### RPC

RPC lets a system do one single task which can be performed on different OSes. It does this by only sending some arguments and receiving back the response and not managing the system itself.

There are languages or libraries within programming that were specifically designed for distributed computing

Distributed systems are very closely related to the idea of parallel computing which aims to improve performance by splitting different tasks that are independent.

*Fun note* there was a program written that scanned a C# program to find independent processes which could be run in parallel this ended up improving the speed of a merge sort by 60%

# Major types of distribution

- Shared memory systems
    - Multiple processors share single bus and live in a single system
    - Syncs through OS
    - Very simple way of doing parallel processes
    - Not very scalable
- Distributed memory systems
    - Multiple processors running on separate systems connected via a network
    - Has multiple operating systems, sometimes the same sometimes different operating systems.
    - Better scalability

The main challenges with distributed systems are

- Transparency
- Scalability
- Dependability
- Performance
- Flexibility

These challenges differ per specific problem case.

## Transparency

There are a couple of different questions relating to transparency

- Is it local or network accessible?
- Do I need to know the location and if so, where is it?
- Can the resources migrate without name changes?
- Does the system make replications?
- Will the system work on failure of a single components and will the user ben notifed?
- Does it work concurrently?
- What other performance implications are there?

## Scalability

The questions about scalability are:

- What is the number of users and resources available?
- What is the distance between users and resources?
- Number of elements to administer?

## Dependability

The questions about dependability are:

- Is availability worth the potential added complexity and performance loss.

## Performance

The questiosn about performance are:

- How important is it? Since it conflicts with other important points. Like transparency, security, dependability and scalability

## Flexibility

The questions about flexibility are:

- How easy is it to extend the resources
- How easy is it to get insight in the resources?
- How well do the resources work together?
- How well separated are resources?

# Paradigms

- Shared memory
- Distributed objects
- Distributed filesystem
- Distributed coordination
- Shared documents
- Agents
- Mobile agents

# Lecture 2: communication

Within architecture communication is important with partitioning, replication and caching. It has to be able to find where data is stored when communicating with a server.

The simplest communication method is the well known `client-server` model.

There are the terms that are called thin client and fat client. A thin client is when the client only runs a basic visual application but the server handles all the requests. For instance most websitese are thin client. There is a spectrum to this but for instance a desktop application also contains some data manipulation functionality which would make it a fat client.

### Pager

A pager within a kernel is dividing data is pages and saving a virtual memory address to it. This is done so that the kernel can handle more data than can be stored in memory by temporarily offloading some memory to non-volatile storage if it is not used and loading it back to memory when it is.