# Midterm

**ADC** ADC stands for analog-to-digital converter which is a unit that converts analog signals to digital (binary). It works by sampling analog inputs at specific intervals and converting these intervals to binary code. Depending on what blocksizes are used the intervals are longer or shorter. This is done since a processor can only handle binary / digital data.

**Analog MUX** is a device which is used to switch between multiple analog signals and let only one analog signal through to the ADC to be converted to a digital signal. This is useful since there are different kind of signals that can be picked up this way.

**Register** a register is a small amount of memory that lies close to the CPU so that it can be accessed very quickly. Examples of things stored are instructions, the paremeters of these instructions, the result of these instructions, memory addresses of data or instructions, stack pointers, function, function parameters, function results.

**Function vs instruction** an instruction is the most basic level of telling a computer what to do. It is like telling the computer to add 6 to a variable X. Or moving some data around or any other single action that can be performed. It is like a step in a todo list. A function is a set of instructions this is better described as the todo list itself.

**System on a chip (SoC)** is a small intergrated chip (IC) that integrates most components of a computer on a single chip. This makes it so it can perform instructions with it’s processor and store everything on it’s own memory.

**CPU timer** a CPU timer is used to schedule tasks on the CPU. This is used to let the CPU jump to the next instruction by fetching and executing it. Sometimes it happens that the CPU is done with an instruction before the CPU timer triggers an interrupt again. In this situation it depends on if the next instruction is already ready in memory. Then the CPU will continue to the next instruction. If not it will enter a wait state. Both have their advantages and disadvantages. By going to the next instruction the CPU does not have to wait and waste time, however if the instruction is reliant on another instruction to be done this can cause problems, hence why the wait state is also sometimes used in these situations. Aside from this it can also be used for reacting to hardware or user events like input on a keyboard. The specific uses of a CPU timer can be hard to explain but a good way is that.

**GPIO** stands for general purpose input/output which are used to connect different devices to a board. On an arduino these are the pins on the board while on a computer’s motherboard these are the pins and slots where devices like the power supply and sound systems can be connected to. Be aware that this only includes devices that are used for input to the chip or to display output of the chip. This means that added chips and controllers are not GPIO since they offer no input or output.

**EPWM module** is a module that is used to generate digital signals which can be converted to analog signals. This is done by converting digital input to a digital  PWM signal which is a binary signal with differing lengths in power which can be converted by an external circuit to an analog output.

The ePWM module exists of several submodules which are:

- **Time-base submodule** is the main clock in the sub module which drives the output of the pwm signals
- **Counter-compare submodule** is used to create the start and end of a PWM signal
- **Action qualifier submodule** determines what action the counter compare submodule should trigger. For instance to start the signal or end the signal
- **Event trigger submodule**
- **Deadband submodule** is a security check that is designed so that only one PWM signal is sent through at a time.
- **Trip-zone submodule** is used to reset the values of the PWM processor at a certain set value
- **Digital compare submodule** is used to compare the PWM value to a set value

**Channel** a channel is used by the CPU to transfer data between the CPU and external components. External components can be anything from input devices to storage on the harddrive or memory. The channel does this by receiving the request from the CPU, then identifying if the source exists and then transferring the data. For this identifying and transfering the channel uses it’s channel processor.

**Bus** the bus is used by the channel to transfer data over. It is basically a wire in the board where digital signals are send over.

**Analog comparator** an analog comparator differs from a normal comparator since the input is not a digital 0 or 1 system where the comparator if OR, XOR, AND and XAND compares a yes or no voltage question with analog this works with voltage and the comparator compares these two voltages and tells the result as a digital signal which analog input is higher

**Direct memory access** is a unit within a system that can be used by the CPU to do data transfers for the CPU. It does this by getting a request from the CPU with a source, destination address and data to be transferred and will then take over the task and perform the transfer without the CPU having to do more than just sending this request to the DMA.

**DSP for conventional processor** a DSP processor is specialised for the purpose that it’s name suggests, digital signal processing. It is more efficient at this than the conventional processor which is not specialised and used for general purpose processing. The DSP is purpose build to take digital signals from input devices and efficiently process them and make decisions based on these inputs.

**Flash memory vs hard disk memory** Flash memory works by having transistors which can be turned on or off to decide if they do or do not conduct electricity by doing this it can store data whil a hard disk saves data by writing the digital data to a magnetic disk. Flash memory is faster since it is not reliant on a spinning disk. Flash memory however is more complex and expensive while not having the life time of a hard disk. Flash memory is very durable though and can take a hit. Hard disks are very useful for long term cheap storage. And for tasks where fast memory is not necessary. Flash memory is used in storing data on motherboard but also in solid state drives and USB drives. While hard disks are used for long term storages in hard disk drives.

**Data sizes in memory** Within data some terms are used a lot when describing sizes of data. Here is a list of the most common used terms:

- **Bit** is a single 0 or 1 value
- **Byte** a group of 8 bits which serves as the basic unit of digital data. It can be used to represent a single number or character. The choice of 8 bits was made because it offers enough options for all numerals, characters and symbols that are used (think also of upper and lower case letters each being a separate thing).
- **Chunk** is a group of bytes which is used to store a single understandable piece of data like a line of text or a small image.
- **Block** is a group of chunks which is used to store a group of single understandable pieces of data like a file or a large image.

**Filter** a filter is used for manipulating a data stream by filtering out data while accentuating the remaining data

**RAM** random access memory is used as memory that should be able to be loaded into the CPU’s registers in a very fast and efficient way. This creates a layer of fast accessible memory between the hard drive and the registers in the CPU.

**CPU clock speed** the clock speed of a CPU defines how many cycles per seconds also known as hertz a CPU performs. This means that the higher the clock speed the more cycles a CPU can do. In one cycle of the CPU typically the following things happen:

- **fetch** fetch the instruction from memory to be performed
- **decode** break the instruction down in the operation to be performed and the data that this operaiton needs to be performed on
- **execute** perform the operation on the data generating a result
- **write** save the result of the operation to a register or the memory.

**ROM** stands for read-only memory. This is memory that can as the name suggests only be read. Most of the time things like firmware are stored as ROM.

- **Boot ROM** boot ROM is a type of ROM that is used to boot a system. This includes the bootloader which starts the hardware and loads the operating system from disk.

**CLA** is a control law accelerator which is used to speed up specific tasks by off loading it from the hardware and performing the operation. These operations are called control algorithms. A CLA is basically a processor unit designed for specifci tasks and when the system needs this specific task performed it will offload it to the CLA.

**FPU** is a floating point unit which is a specialised processor unit for arithmetic. This means that it is specialised to do calculations so the CPU can offload these tasks to these units.

**Interrupt** an interrupt of a CPU is used to stop the current process within the CPU and perform an urgent task. When the CPU saves it’s current task with the current register values and fetches the urgent task from the interrupt handler.

**PIE** also known as a peripheral interrupt expansion is used to orchestrate the different interrupts that are sent to the connected peripherals.

**Program counter** contains the memory address of the next instruction that should be executed.

**Watchdog timer** is a module that reset the board if the CPU crashes it does this by checking if it’s own 8 bit timer overflows. This works by the timer counting up constantly and getting reset by the CPU. If the CPU crashes then this value will overflow and reset the CPU

### Notes

- Connect device before starting code composer
- Resource explorer for templates of projects
- The hammer icon is used to build the project
- Target configuration is used to let the editor know which device is connected so the editor knows how to debug.
- Bug icon to debug
- Suspend button to halt the problem
- **Profile clock** is used to time the execution time of code and is meassured in cycles
- Binary files are saved as **.bin**
- Types of breakpoints
    - **Software breakpoint** a software breakpoint is a breakpoint set by the operating system which will halt the program running at this breakpoint programmatically by the operating system, this method is very flexible, since they are set on lines of code that are run.
    - **Hardware breakpoint** a hardware breakpoint is a breakpoint set to occur when a specific instruction is used or address is called. This is more efficient and reliable but less flexible since it is done by instruction or memory address instead of actual line of code.
- C28x memory interfaces there are two types, data and address buses these are:
    - **PAB** which stands for program address bus, which carries addresses for read and writes in program space
    - **DRAB** which stands for data read address bus, which carries addresses to read from data space
    - **DWAB** which stands for data write address bus, which carries addresses to write to data space
    - **PRDB** which stands for program read data bus, which carries instructions or data during read from program space
    - **DRDB** which stands for data read data bus, which carries data during the read from data space
    - **DWDB** which stands for data write data bus, which carries the data during the write to data space