# 2023-11-21

# Backpack problem

There is a set of items which have two values: value and weight. The backpack problem tries to find out with a limited amount of carrying capacity to get as much value as possible.

$x \in (0, 1)$ stands for item in backpack or not

$W$ stands for the total carrying capacity of the backpack

| ID | Value (p) | Weight (w) | x |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 5 | 3 | 1 |
| 2 | 1 | 1 | 0 |

For this problem a new mathematical notation is used not seen before in the courses which is with a max before the summation and a constaint after it. Which notes that the summation should search for a maximum value within this constraint. 
This is done like this $max \sum^n_{i=1} p_i x_i - K max (\sum^n_{i=1}w_i x_i - W, 0)$

### Evolutionary strategy 1+1

This strategy works by taking a function and per iteration performing one mutation and comparing the result of the original function and the mutated function and seeing which has a higher fitness. The fitness of the higher of the two (original vs mutated function) will be used in the next iteration of this strategy.

### Pareto rule

The pareto rule is the famous 20/80 rule which is a rule observed in many aspects of life which means that for instance 80% of the wealth is earned by 20% of the companies, etc, etc.

## Pertrubation operator

Makes small changes in the function, if more than 20% is positive this mutation should be increased in amount, if lower than 20% it should be lowered and if equal it should stay the same.

Gaussian and cauchy distributuions are observed.

$\mu + \lambda$