# 2024-02-27

# Architecture

New computers use transistors while previously it used tubes. This change came in the second generation of computers which was in 1955-1965. In this generation thhere was also a switch from punch cards to tape.

A linker is a piece of software which creates references to external libraries that are used to a program. These program binaries are called object files.

In the past a big problem was that a processor took up a lot of resources on monitoring the health of external devices. This  was a problem until interrupts were invented. This is a physical signal from the external device that it is finished. By sending an interrupt to the operating system and it being able to respond to this interrupt and also interrupt the running program to respond to this input.

The operating system is the orchestrator of the programs and devices and receives the interrupts when an external device or program is run. This is important since the processor can only run one program at a time in the old architecture. This was the initial idea behind an operating system. Nowadays it also handles the distribution of resources, the interface between hardware and software through the kernel that is included in an operating system.

In the second generation multiprogramming was also invented. This is the process of storing multiple instructions from multiple programs in memory and an operating system switching which program is run on the processor ever X seconds. This gives the illusion of concurrency, but for all purposes it works like this. This was called multiprogramming.

In the third generation intergrated circuits started to be used this was in the period 1965-1980. In the third generation also the terminal was introduced. This was an io device that displayed some text and could receive input from a keyboard.

In the third generation the unix operating system was also invented. Unix is nowadays the base of for instance Linux and MacOS but also many more.

In the third generation also the term mini computer was born. These computers however are not mini to todays standards since they were still very large compared to a personal computer. They were as big as a clothing cabinet.

The fourth and final generation introduced microprocessors. This started in 1980 and is still going on. The microprocessor also introduced the concept of the personal computer. These were cheap computers that almost anyone could afford. Other examples of microcomputers like the personal computer are servers, devices, etc.

The interrupts are served by the interrupt controller which decides when to issue the interrupt and what information to send with the interrupt. The interrupt controller receives its input from external devices. Interrupts also contain a priority rating. This also decides if a program is halted or not.

An interrupt is also displayed with `Int.`  the processor also sends an acknowledgement back to the interrupt controller which is mostly abbreviated with `Inta.` .

After sending a highest priority interrupt the interrupt controller resets itself to all zeros.

The interrupt service halts the program run after the current instruction and runs the instructions from the interrupt handler. After the processor will continue with the next program which is still stored in memory.

Two registers are stored on the hardware these are the program status and program counter. The instructiosn for the program are stored programmatically.

At the heart of the operating system lives the kernel. This converts software instructions to hardware instructions. After this there are drivers which convert input from different devices internal and external to software instructions that can be handled by the kernel. After this there are buffers. Buffers are volatlile data where data is stored. The file system is after this and stores files in a non volatile way. After there is the program supervisor which orchestrates the processes to be run and pass to the kernel. After this there is run-time systems which are programs that run detached from the user. Lastly there are user programs which a user can interact with.

# Processes

The aspects which are important when handling processes in an operating system

- Enabling parallel execution of programs
- Short response times from execution
- Managing allocation of resources to processes
- Providing an interface for communication between processes

A process can be started from multiple sources, like initialisation of the system (boot), a user action, a call from a program but also from the acceptance of an interrupt.

Processes can be terminated by finishing the program, an error, execution of an illegal operator or by another process which interrupts it.

A process can have one of three states which are

- running: annotates that the process is running
- ready: annotates that the process has everything needed to run but still has to run on the processor
- blocked: annotates that the process is still waiting for some parameters that it needs to run

The scheduler handles which process should be run. It does this by returning the number of the process that should be run next when requested by the processor or the interrupt. It does this by taking some things into account which are

- the priority
- how many resources are needed
- how fast the process can be run

Some important fields within the microkernel are:

- Registers
- Program counter
- Processer status word (word that describes the status of the processor)
- Stack pointer (point where the top of the stack lives)
- Process state (which denotes the state of the process)
- Priority (which denotes the priority of an interrupt and process)
- Scheduling parameters (which contain the parameters with which a program can be run)
- Process ID (which denotes the ID refering to a certain process to be run or that is running)