# 2023-10-26

The markov chains most important properties are $\alpha, P$.

To calculate an eigen value find the vector where the Matrix transformation is equal to the vector multiplied by a number. This is written as $Ax = \lambda x$.

**Eigenvector** after doing a linear transformation on a graph some values do not get knocked off their original path but only get scaled. These can be described as eigenvectors with their scaling being called eigenvalues. The eigenvalue can also be 0 as long as the eigenvector stays on the same trajectory.

**Left eigenvector** is the eigenvector of a **row vector** which means the same as for a normal vector. The **Right eigenvector** is **eigen vector** from $A^T$ from matrix $A$ from the **left eigenvector**.

**Determinant** the determinant of a matrix can be calculted as follows $det{\begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{bmatrix}} = ad - bc$ with a 2x2 matrix and $det{\begin{bmatrix} a & b & c \\ d & e & f \\ g & h & i \end{bmatrix}} = a(ei - fh) - b(di - fg) + c(dh - eg)$ for a 3x3 matrix.

Let’s put this into practise

$A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 \\ 1 & 0 \end{bmatrix}$ to find the value we need to find a vector $x$ where $Ax = \lambda x$ where lambda is any real number.

$A - \lambda I$ where $I$ is an identity matrix of the same size as matrix $A$. An identity matrix is a matrix like ${\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}}$. This will result in a matrix of $\begin{bmatrix} 1 - \lambda & 2 \\ 1 & - \lambda \end{bmatrix}$. Then to take the determinant from this the calculation $(1-\lambda)(-\lambda) - 2 * 1 = (1-\lambda)(-\lambda) - 2 = -\lambda +  \lambda^2 - 2 = \lambda^2 -\lambda    - 2$. Will result in $(\lambda + 1)(\lambda - 2)$. Which gives us the eigenvector $[2, -1]$ To calculate the discriminant we can use $b^2 - 4ac$ so $(-\lambda)^2 - 4 *\lambda * -2 = \lambda + 8 \lambda = 9\lambda$. Then to further this calculation the formula ${b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}\above{1pt}2a}$ so ${-1 + \sqrt{9} \above{1pt} 2}$ and ${-1 - \sqrt{9} \above{1pt} 2}$. Which results in ${2 \above{1pt} 2} = 1$ and ${-4 \above{1pt} 2} = -2$.

### Recurrence

When seeing a matrix is shown of $\begin{bmatrix} 1/3 & 2/3 & 0 \\ 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 1/4 & 1/2 & 1/4 \end{bmatrix}$ then the probability can be calculated when a variable option $x \in \{1, 2, 3\}$ will end up on the same option again after infinity tries. For this matrix this is $f_j = P(T_j < \infin | X_0 = j)$ the values $f_1 = 1, f_2 = 1, f_3 = 1/4$. This is the case because if we look at the matrix when the value is 1 or 2 it will never return to 3 but it will always be able to return to 1 or 2 when there are infinitie tries. In this case $f_1$ means when starting at 1 what is the probability to end up at value 1 again after infinite tries, this is the same for $f_2$. With $f_3$ the probability is only $1/4$ since it can return to the same value after one iteration but if the value changes it will never return.