# 2023-11-28

Neural networks are the third way for finding the optimum value, this however does it by finding all solutions instead of approaching it.

Classification problem is tring ot find the class data belongs to (think about pattern recog).

A classifier is a function that maps input data to a category (class).

Most used

- Perceptron
- Neural networks
- Support vector machines

Neural networks can guess wrong if a second object is also in their training set for instance for training a neural network what a crash helmet looks like if the picture also includes motor cycles the neural network can start to classify motor cycle pictures as a crash helmet. This is mostly a problem if the neural network has a high level of classes, for instance if it only needs to classify helmets this will not be a problem.

machine learning is the collection of things that the to be classified object contains and seeing what data can be extracted from this. Then with all these features it will check which class is most similar to these features.

The classes are created by training the machine on data that has the defined class with it and finding what evidence it can extract from the training set and what features overlap in the training set of a specific class.

Machine learning is the training of a model with training data. The model then after training takes the information it has learnt to classify input data as a specific class.

Overfitting means that a model loses it’s general approximation and it will become very vulnerable to outliers.

Validation can be used to combat overfitting, validation uses another set of training data called validation data and will see if the model classifies data correctly and see the percantage that got classified correctly.

With machine learning generalisation is needed to prevent overfitting which results in performance degradation.

Regularisation tries to simplify the model as much as possible.