# Finals

### Neural networks

Neural networks work with Neurons to classify input it contains three layers

- input layer: the input layer takes the features from the input and send them to the classifiers in the hidden layer, the amount of neurons in the input layer is equal to the amount of features
- hidden layer: the hidden layer takes the input and transforms it to make a decision on it in the output layer the amount of layer in the hidden layer is equal to the amount of classifiers
- output layer: the output layer takes the transformed data from the hidden layer and makes a classification based on this this output layer. The amount of neurons in the output layer is equal to the amount of classes. It does this using any of the following activation functions
    - Unipolar: max(0, x)
    - Bipolar: min(1, max(-1, x))
    - Unipolar sigmoid: 1 / (1 + exp(-x)) or ${1 \above{1pt} 1 + e^{-x}}$
    - Gausian: $e^{-x^2}$
    
    ### Convolution
    
    Convolutional layers work by reducing the size of images (not always) it does this by taking the max or mean in a kernel. These kernels are usually the size 1 by 1, 3 by 3, 5 by 5 or 7 by 7. Aside from the size it can also contain padding. The padding is the amount a kernel can go over the edge. So a 3 by 3 kernel with  a padding of 1 does not reduce the size of the original image. A kernal can also contain a stride. This reduces the size as well since it moves more than 1 (if the stride is more than 1) each iteration which reduces everything quickly.
    
    ### Pooling
    
    Pooling works simpler by splitting the original image into pools and taking the mean and max of each pool. This reduces the size by dividing the size by the size of the pool.
    
    ### Backpropagation
    
    Back propagation works by comparing the output of a training set with the actual classes this training set contains and calculating the difference between the output of the network and the wanted results. This is done by for each output neuron which classifies a specific class checking what input from the hidden layer made the result what it is and seeing how this can be changed to improve this classification, these values are then saved and this is done for every data point in the set or batch (depending on the way the neural network is trained). After calculating all the values these values are averaged out and the weights are updated accordingly. This is how it works for a single layered neural network, for a multi layered network this works the same but it also needs the extra step of not only calculating how each weight of the final layer in the hidden layer needs to be changed but also the layers that provide the input to this layer with the same logic, by calculating the average over all data points and seeing how they affect all the neurons in the last layer.
    
    To calculate this something called the chain rule is used. To describe this simply if there is a neural network with 2 hidden layers and one output layer. To calculate how much the weight in the second layer lets call it $w_{21}$ influences the result $C_{0}$, where result of the second layer is $L_{2}$ and the result of the activation function is $a_{0}$. It can be calculated by using the chain rule which states ${\partial C_{0} \above{1pt} w_{21}} = {\partial L_{2} \above{1pt} w_{21}} {\partial a_{0} \above{1pt} L_{2}} {\partial C_{0} \above{1pt} a_{0}}$. This is also called calculating the gradient descent.