# Midterm

# Goal

The goal of linear and non linear programming is to find the minimum and/or maximum of a function.

**Epsilon** the $\epsilon$ stands for the optimal value or the approximation that is close to it.

**Beta** the $\beta$ stands for coefficient of a line.

**Convex** a function is convex when a line can be drawn through the graph only touching 1 or 2 points in the function. This is important when trying to find the optimum since a convex function has only one local minimum or maximum which is also the global minimum or maximum.

**Differentiable** is a function that when zoomed in enough on every point a line could describe the function

**Heuristic** an heuristic process is a process that can get close to the answer but not get there, because of time constraint or because it is impossible.

**First order derivative** the slope of a function at a point

**Second order derivative** the change in slope at a point

**Partial derivative** is a derivative that is taken from a function that has 2 or more variables. For example a function $f(x, y) = 2x^2 + 3y + 2xy^2$ there are two partial derivatives which are ${\partial f \above{1pt} \partial x} = 4x + 2y^2$ and ${\partial f \above{1pt} \partial y} = 3 + 4xy$ this is the first order partial derivative and the second order partial derivative will be ${\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x \partial x} = 4$ and ${\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial y \partial y} = 4x$. This can also be done over multiple variable in this case over $x$ and $y$ this is for instance ${\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x \partial y} = 4y$.

**Hesse matrix** the hesse matrix of a function that has multiple variables is all possible second order partial derivatives like this $\begin{bmatrix} {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_1 \partial x_1} & {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_1 \partial x_2} & … & {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_1 \partial x_n} \\ {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_2 \partial x_1} & {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_2 \partial x_2} & … & {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_2 \partial x_n} \\ ... & ... & ... & ... \\ {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_n \partial x_1} & {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_n \partial x_2} & ... & {\partial^2 f \above{1pt} \partial x_n \partial x_n} \end{bmatrix}$so for the example function used in **partial derivative** that is $f(x, y) = 2x^2 + 3y + 2xy^2$ the Hessian matrix would be $\begin{bmatrix} 4 & 4y \\ 4y & 4x \end{bmatrix}$.

**Gradient** calculating the gradient is a little easier since it only requires the first order partial derivative. Which results in $\begin{bmatrix} {\partial f \above{1pt} \partial x_1} & {\partial f \above{1pt} \partial x_2} & … & {\partial f \above{1pt} \partial x_n} \end{bmatrix}$

**Discriminant** can be obtained by taking the derivative of the hessian matrix which is done for matrix  $A = \begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{bmatrix}$ the derivative is $A’ = ad - bc$ for the example this would result in 
$4*4x - 4y^2 = 16x - 4y^2$

# Descent methods

Descrent methods unlike the previous methods try to get to the local or global maximum or minimum by iteratively changing one or multiple values given to the function and seeing if the results have improved. This is repeated till the maximum or minimum is found, this can both be the global or local maximum or minimium, the descent method has no way of knowing.

# Direct search methods

Direct search methods are simple since they only need function evalutations, they work well for **non-differentiable** and **convex** functions.

## Hooke and jeeves method

The hooke and jeeves method is a method of finding the local minimum or local maximum. This is done by performing the function and checking if the value is closer to the min or max after adding $x + d_n\tau$ where $\tau$ is the determined step size and $d_n$ is the step number and direction. This results in $f(x) < f(x + \tau)$ or $f(x) > f(x + \tau)$ depending on if the search is for the min or max. If the value goes over the search value immediately also  $f(x) < f(x - \tau)$ or $f(x) > f(x - \tau)$ can be used. Good for non-differentiable and convex functions

## Downhill simplex method

The downhill simplex method evaluates values in a function untill the result starts increasing again. Good for non-differentiable and convex functions.

## Nelder and mead method

The nelder and mead method works for a function in n-dimensions. In these dimensions for each dimension a random point is chosen and of these points the value is calculate with the objective function. The point that scores the worst is projected through the centroid which is calculated between all points. Then it is checked if the point improves it’s value by going past the centroid and the perpendicular line between two points or staying closer to the centroid. After this step the worst point is redrawn at the newly improved point and the process starts again. Good for non-differentiable and convex functions.

# Descent methods

Has the same advantages as a direct search methods but does do a line search

## Method of Gauss-Seidel

Changes a variabel iteratively and checks if the value has improved, if so it will keep going, if not it will stop and see the last value as the optimal value. This method is very efficient but does not work well for non convex functions. Good for non-differentiable and convex functions.

## Method of powell

The method of powell is a method of generating random points and picking one as a starting position. Then it is checked if one random point that has been calculated has a lower value, if so this is the next point in the iteration, after new random points nearby in range of step $\tau$ are calculated and if a lower point is found in the random points the optimisation will move here. Best for non-differentiable and convex functions.

# Descent direction methods

Calculates the descrent direction and descents untill the derivative is 0 this works well for **differentiable** and **convex** functions

## Steepest descent method

The steepest descent method works by getting the gradient of a point and following this gradient downhill for length $\tau$ which is the step size chosen. Best for differiantable and convex functions.

## Newton method

The newton method tries to find the minimum by starting from a guess where this minimum is and then deciding on the direction of the step based on the gradient (derivative).

### Objective function

The objective function in the nelder and mead method is done by keeping the other variables at a constant value and changing only one value and observing the result.

# Global optimisation

## Uniform grid method

One method to find the global minimum or maximum is to perform the previously mentioned methods on multiple domains of a function and taking the lowest minimum or the highest maximum over all these domains.

### Branch and bound

Works by breaking the space into multiple sub problems and finding the optimal value within each and then comparing all the results.

### Pentaly function

A penalty function is to create constraint on an objective function to keep the value from straying across some set boundary by adding a pentaly value that gets bigger as it crosses the boundary furher and further

**Interior penalty function** start from an infeasible point (random) and go torwards the solution by going towards the feasible region and getting a penalty when crosses the boundary of this region.

**Exterior penalty function** start from a feasible point (a good guess) and go towards the solution, this making the penalty increase. This makes the penalty become very large when getting close to the solution.

In general the interior penalty function is most often used.

# Global optimisation

Global optimisation searches for the global minimum of maximum compared to finding the local minimum of maximum in the previous paragraphs. For this there are a couple of methdos which are:

- Point to point optimisation: generates a sequence of points and based on the results continues to new points in the next generations.

### Controlled random search

CRS works by searching on random poitns within a specified neighbourhood and saving the best solution and randomly selecting new points untill a point that is good enough is achieved. This is called CRS1, CRS2 expands on this and redraws this neighbourhood around the best point each generation this neighbourhood is smaller than the total starting neighbourhood this makes the algorithm converge fasted on the best point. CRS3 expands on this further by also decreasing the search area around the best point after each generation.

These methods are also called stochastic search

### Simulated annealing

Simulated annealing works by searching random points and lowering the acceptance rate of each point. This starts from accepting points which have higher energy while searching for a global minimum and then lowering this acceptance rate to only accepting lower poitns. This is good because this algorithm will be less likely to end up in a local minimum.

## Lipschitz condition

The liptschitz condition states that as the parameters grows the result of the function grows at about the same rate which is the Lipschitz constant written with **L** or **K**.

# Genetic algorithms

Genetic algorithms work by searching the optimal binary string of an objective function. This is done by sometimes mutating a bit based on probablity and by crossover of binary values of the two best values of each generation.

## $\mu + \lambda$ evolutionary strategy

Means that after generation and checking the fitness the strategy to generate the next iteration is by taking the best of the set after recombination and mutation and of the set before this happens this means that they are a combination of both. This works well with larger populations since with smaller populations new individuals are not generated often.

## $\mu, \lambda$ evolutionary strategy

Means that after generation and checking the fitness the strategy to generate the next iteration is to only take the set of recombination and mutation. This works well with smaller populations but run the risk of losing the best individuals

## Tournament selection

The tournament selection within genetic algorithms is a strategy where a number of individuals are chosen from the population and the best individual gfrom this group is chosen. This means that this individual is not picked from the total population size. The advantage of tournament selection over the best individual selection from all the population is because the selection of individuals to be in the tournement is random which adds the chance of finding the global minimum or maximum.

## Roulette selection

The roulette selection works by selecting $n$ numbers of best values with a probablity of the sum of all fitness values and use this as the divisor times the number of elements that will be picked so for a sequence of [1, 2, 3, 1] it will be ${3 \above{1pt} 6}$ probability of best one getting picked ${2 \above{1pt} 6}$ probability of the second best one getting picked, etc.

**Pareto rule** is the 80/20 rule

## Truncation selection

The truncation selection is the simplest selection method, it orders the individuals based on fitness and takes $n$ individuals from the top. The danger of this selection is that it can get stuck on a local minimum.

## Ranking selection

The ranking selection works by assigning a rank to each data point and then with a probability in each rank will select a data point. This works well because it maintains it’s diversity like this.

# Gaussian vs cauchy distribution

Gaussian distribution is shaped like a bell and goes to the mean quickly. The cauchy distribution has a longer tail at the ends.