# 2024-03-05

The first version of Unix was refered to as a kernel not an operating system this was because the difference was not clear at the time (1971).

The scheduler in the operating system handles the allocation of processor resources to individual processes. It schedules processes from the **process array**.

When the computer detects that the power is cut off, it quickly stores the registers in memory.

The three types of processor interrupts are

- error: interrupt and do not return
- unblocking interrupt
- blocking interrupt

In the two hardware registeres the program counter and the program state are stored.

After an external device raises an interrupt to the system it also changes the status register. This is how an operating system can determine which device has sent and interrupt and which has not.

In the past every device had it’s own bus this is still the case nowadays but there is a PCI-E controller that translates the device to what device it is and not to which bus it is connected to.

A problem with the classical architecture is that if two programs are meant to run together where one creates data and the other reads it, the reading program cannot access the data untill the writing program is done.

For this problem the idea of threads was invented. The different instructions are moved to a single process with two threads that access the same data, keep in mind that each thread contains it’s own stack.

Every thread has it’s own registers and stack to be able to run independentlly from each other.

When running processes in this way there are two ways to do it. The process can manage its own thread table and handle the switching or the kernel can handle all threads in a global thread table. The situation with a process managing it’s own thread is more efficient while the kernel managing all the threads is more flexible.

There is also a hybrid option where kernel thread connect the process and the kernel to each other. This solution however is only used within oracle server nowadays because they acquired the company that invented this, Sun microsystems.

A system call sends some instructions to the processor to be run.

# Lecture 8: Kernel

For POSIX systems (UNIX included) the kernel lives in the operating system

For systems like windows the kernel is isolated and is the lowest part of the system.

The core function of a kernel is to split the physical processor into multiple virtual processors so multitasking can be performed on the system.

When an interrupt occurs, the kernel orchestrates that the interrupted process will start from from the right location again.

The descriptor table stores the information from a process that has to be run, is running or is suspended. If a process finishes or is interrupted this table is used to see what process to run next.

### Homework:

- What is a thread and what does it do specifically?