# 2023-11-23

Next time if they ask about amount of parameters actual show calculations of these values, cost a lot of points on mid term test.

Check pseudo code double cost 1 point in test.

Error propagation is the most fundamental algorithm in machine learning.

Neuron’s model is two factors

Weight vector **w** which is equal to $w = [w_1, w_2, …, w_{n-1}, w_n]$

Input vector **x** which is equal to $x = [x_1, x_2, …, x_{n-1}, x_n]$

Where the activation function is equal to  $y = f(w^T x)=f)(\sum^n_{i=1} w_i x_i)$

The activation function decides if the neuron in Neuron’s model will fire or not.

Neuron’s model is used to describe in a mathematical way how neural network work by using the input as the input of the input, the weight as the weight of the input on this neuron and the activation function which decides if the neuron will fire or not.

Activation functions can be of two different types, **bipolar** where value is between -1 and 1 and **unipolar** where value is between 0 and 1.

To learn this neuron’s model two ways are used.

- Batch learning, where all the training data is run through the model and weights are updated based on the data that is missclassified
- Incremental learning, where each batch is run through the model separately and the weights are updated based on the data that is missclassified.

## Incremental learning

For learning a signal a perceptron method is used. This is a method where per iteration it is checked if the actual output is the same as the desired output and if not the weights are changed according to the learning rate. The learning rate is the step size of the increase or decrease of the weight. This means that with a higher learning rate the speed of learning goes up but the precision of the result will go down.

To explain very simply the perceptron method / perceptron rule goes over every actual output iteratively and compares it to the desired output if there is a difference (since neuron output a binary value) it changes the weight by the learning rate. If the desired output is higher than the actual ouptut the weight is increased, if the desired output is lower than the actual output the weight is lowered by the learning rate.

## Neural networks

Neural networks can consist of a single layer network where a combination of neurons send signals to one layer of neurons that make a decision based on the combination of signals that are received. This can also be made more complex with multilayered networks which combine the results of the neurons that combine other neurons to make even more complex decisions.

### One layer network

Within the one layer network only one layer has to be optimised to create the optimal precision in classification.

## Learning

With learning each step calculates the error and changes the weights accordingly to try and approach the optimum number of errors by the classifier.

A good strategy is to change the value of the learning rate or the initial value to see how it changes the training.