# 2024-02-19

# Initial info

The goal of the course is to know what goes on beneath a programming language.

- Computer organization and design - David A. Patterson, John L. Hennessy

Learn about AMD and intell processor architecture

NASM assembler, GNU x86 C compiler

Github from teacher: [https://github.com/gbm-ii](https://github.com/gbm-ii)

The course will consist of during the labs 2 small projects to be done in the lab, 2.5 big projects to be completed at home and show results in the lab.

RISC-V assemlby and x86 hybrid assembly will be used.

Go over NASM assembly syntax

Probably if you get over 50 points before the exam you will not have to make the exam.

# Lecture 1

The main information units are:

- bit (0 or 1)
- octet (8 bits)
- byte (smallest adressable unit, usually 8 bits)

Binary multiples

| Number of bytes | Shorthand | Fullname |
| --- | --- | --- |
| $2^{10}$ | Ki | kibi |
| $2^{20}$ | Mi | mebi |
| $2^{30}$ | Gi | gibi |
| $2^{40}$ | Ti | tebi |
| $2^{50}$ | Pi | pebi |
| $2^{60}$ | Ei | exbi |

To represent binary numbers octal or hexadecimal numbers are often used. Hexadecimal is the more popular choice in this instance.

In C and in multiple assembly standard 0x denotes that the following characters represent a hexadecimal number.

In C it is also the case that if you start an integer that the following characters represent an octal number and not a decimal number.

Flynn’s taxonomy table

- SISD: one single instruction which accesses one single data set
- SIMD: one single instruction which accesses multiple data sets
- MISD: multiple instructions which access one single data set
- MIMD: multiple instructions which access multiple data sets

A token is the output of a process, it contains a tag describing what it contains and the data.

Computer architecture has 4 components these are:

- Instruction processor: which fetches and decodes instructions
- Instruction memory hierarchy: which stores the instructions
- Data processor: performs operations on data
- Data memory hierarchy: which stores the data, arguments and results.

These components can be connected in multiple ways. Each component can be present 1 to N times. The connection types between these components can be described as the following:

- 1 - 1: one to one connection
- 1 - N: one has connection with many
- N - N: many has single connection with many
- N x N: many has connection with every other many

Memory hierarchy exists so that the fastest memory lives closest to the processor while memory that does not have to be accessed as quickly can live further. The advantage of this is that the total memory of the processor can be bigger while still maintaining it’s speed as much as possible. Otherwise the speed would be equal to the furthest memory that could be fetched.