# 2024-03-20

External symbols are symbols referenced in a module but defclared in another module. In C and assembly it needs to b e stated that this is the case.

In assembly the keyword for this is `extern` .

When a program is sinlge module, which means that it does not reference anything else, the process of linking is just the process of converting the object file to an executable. Some compilers can also directly create the executuable omitting the object creation step.

A library is a collection of object modules that can be used to write a program. These libraries in assembly have the extension .a (for unix) and .lib (for windows)

When linking the linker can sense which functions are imported. This is then also the only code that is eventually included minimising the total size of the result.

Some basic system operations are

- open: open file
- close: close file
- read: read file
- write: write file
- seek: move position in buffer
- sbrk: dynamic memory alloc
- exit: program termination

`equ` means create a constant

## Hybrid programming

Hybrid programming is a program that uses multiple programming languages.

To write a program that can be used within hybrid programming it must adhere to the rules of the application binary interface (ABI).

There are registeres with specific valeus in the processor. To perform specifci actions the data has to be stored in the right registers before performing the system call.

Saved registers are registers that should not be changed during an action. This  can be by not touching them or storing the values before performing the action and restoring it after.

Temporary registers do not have this rule they can be used freely.

In the first lines of code of a subroutine some things can be done:

- Aligning the stack
- Aligning the frame pointer
- Etc

Basically they are all the things that need to be prepared for a function to run properly

In the last lines of code of a subroutine the clean up is done. This entails

- Deallocating memory that was used
- Restoring potential saved registers if changed
- Restore other values like pointers

In some compilers all external symbols are prepended with the `_` symbol. It used to be all compilers but currently only the microsoft C compiler still does this.

Lab lecture 4, slide 15 is very important when writing assembly

EAX, ECX, EDX form the temp group use them as you like.

EBX, ESI, EDI are the saved registers they need to be restored after usage.

ESP, EBP are used for the stack and frame pointer.

The ABI standard says that the stack data used must be 64, 128 or 256 bits.

To display a 4 bit nubmer it can be display as a single hexadecimal digit

To display an 8 bit number it can be display as two hexadecimal digits

To display a 16 bit number it can be display as four hexadecimal digits.