# 2023-10-16

Time homogeneity: For each step in the chain the probability of something happening is the same as the last step

- Markov chain (in course will be time homogeneous)
    - Markov property
    - Can be described with a transition matrix
    - $\begin{bmatrix}P11 & P12 & … & P1n \\ P21 & P22 & ... & P2n \\ ... & ... & ... \\ Pn1 & Pn2 & ... & Pnn\end{bmatrix}$
    - If you flip a coin where the chance of going from heads to tails is 2/3 but the chance to stay the same is 1/3 this can be described with the above matrix as $P11 = 1/3$ and $P12 = 2/3$ if the chances of going from tails to heads is both 1/2 for staying the same value or changing this will result in $P21 = 1/2$ and $P22 = 1/2$. This results in the following matrix $\begin{bmatrix} 1/3 & 2/3 \\ 1/2 & 1/2 \end{bmatrix}$.
    - Initial distribution: value at $X_0$ which is the initial starting value.
        - In the example this would be the value assigned to heads or tails.
        - After the coin has been flipped for the first time using the matrix with the odds can be used to calculated what the odds are of either the coin changing it’s value or that it will stay the same.
        - This will result in a markov chain of values where each step the odds can be calculated.
    - The set that is given is the possible values this is written as $x = \{1,2\}$ this is a set of values.

*Example of markov chain of coin flipping:*

| $X_0$ | $X_1$ | $X_2$ | $X_…$ | $X_n$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 2 | 2 | … | n |

When writing $P(X_3=1,X_5=2)$ this means that what is the probability of when the chain is created the third value will be 1 and the fifth value will be 2 (values 1 and 2 are placeholders for heads or tails).

$P(X_5=2|X_3=1)$ means what is the probability of $X_5 = 1$ occuring when $X_3=1$

$S = (1,2)$

$P = \begin{bmatrix}1/2 & 1/2 \\ 0 & 1\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}P(X_{11}) & P(X_{12}) \\ P(X_{21}) & P(X_{22}) \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} P(X_{n+1}=1|X_n=1) & P(X_{n+1}=1|X_n=2) \\  P(X_{n+1}=2|X_n=1) &  P(X_{n+1}=2|X_n=2) \end{bmatrix}$

$P(X_2=1|X_0=1)=P(X_2=1,X_1=1|X_0=1) + P(X_2=1, X_1=2|X_0=1) =  {P(X_2=1,X_1=1,X_0=1)\above{1pt}P(X_0=1)} =$

${P(X_2=1,X_1=1,X_0=1)\above{1pt}P(X_0=1)}+{P(X_2=1,X_1=2,X_0=1)\above{1pt}P(X_0=1)} =$

${P(X_2=1|X_1=1)*P(X_1=1, X_0=1)\above{1pt}P(X_0=1)}+{P(X_2=1|X_1=2)*P(X_1=2,X_0=1)\above{1pt}P(X_0=1)}$

The calculation here seems very difficult but what is being calculated is the probability of the second throw resulting in 1 when the starting position is also 1. It is calculated what the probability is for going from 1 to 2 and then back to 1 and the change of the value staying 1 at all times. Since in the matrix it is shown that the value cannot go from 2 to 1 this will cancel out and the probability of the value always staying 1 is the actual probability. This means that the first change is $1/2$ of staying the same and for the second throw it is the same $1/2$. So to calculate the probability the calculation $1/2 * 1/2$ can be used which will result in $25\%$. The probability of the value being 2 is then quite easy just subtract the chance by 1 which will result in $1 - 0.25 = 75\%$.

With matrix $\begin{bmatrix}1/2 & 1/2 \\0 & 1\end{bmatrix}$ this would look like this in code:

```jsx
function probability(value, step) {
	let probability = 1;

	for(let i = 0; i < step; i++) {
			probability * 0.5;
	}

	if(value === 1) {
		return probability;
	} else {
		return 1 - probability;
	}
}
```

$P(n+m) = P(n)P(m)$

### Example 11

You can pick a coin where one coin is special and the other is normal. Then we will attempt to calculate what the odds are of picking random coin out of a set of 10 and then what value I will get in $i$ throws.

In the example we will try to calculate what the odds are when we throw a coin 5 times and it ending on heads every time. We also assume that there is 1 special coin and 9 normal coins.

$B_1$ = normal coin

$B_2$ = special coin that always ends on heads

$B_1 \cup B_2 = \Omega$

$B_1 \cap B_2 = \emptyset$

$P(A) = P(A \cap B_1) \cup P(A \cap B_2) = P(A \cap B_1) + P(A \cap B_2) =$ 

$P(A|B_1)P(B_1)+P(A|B_2)P(B_2)$

$P(A|B_1) = 1/2^5$

$P(A|B_2) = 1$

In this example you can see that if coin $B_2$ is picked that the odds of throwing heads 5 times are $100\%$ since the coin always ends on heads. Picking this coin $P(B_2)$ is only $10\%$. When the coin $B_1$ is picked the odds are $1/2$ to the power of 5 since the coin has a $50\%$ chance of being heads for each throw and it has to be thrown 5 times. The odds of picking $P(B_1)$ is $90\%$.

$\alpha = (1/2, 1/2)$.

$\alpha P = [1/2,1/2] \begin{bmatrix}1/2 & 1/2 \\ 0 & 1\end{bmatrix} = [1/4, 3/4]$

$\alpha P = [1,0] \begin{bmatrix}1/2 & 1/2 \\ 0 & 1\end{bmatrix} = [1/2, 1/2]$

$\alpha P = [0,1] \begin{bmatrix}1/2 & 1/2 \\ 0 & 1\end{bmatrix} = [1/2, 1]$

$P(X_5=i,X_3=j)=P(X_5=i|X_3=j)P(X_3=j)$

It wont be on the test to do this in reverse.

When calculating odds of something happening it is good to run as many iterations as possible so the odds approach a specific value.

$P(X_1=1,X_3=1) = P(X_3=1|X_1=1)P(X_1=1)$

### Homework

Example 8 from slides.