# 2023-10-30

A **finite** Markov chain is a markov chain with finite values that can show up.

An **irreducible** Markov chain is a markov chain where any state can be reached from any other state in one or more steps. This means that within **infinity** steps it will not end up on one specific value but keep oscillating.

**gcd** stands for greatest common divisor. This is used as an operation on a set of numbers that is the greatest divisor that can be performed on all the entries in the sequence.

When the state is aperiodic the **gcd** will be $1$. If there is an empty set where **gcd** is performed on the outcome will be $\infin$.

An example of how to use this is $d(i) = gcd \{ n > 0 : \mathbb{P}_n(i, i) > 0 \} = gcd \{ 2, 4, 6, 8, … \} = 2$

If a markov chain is aperiodic that means that it is not deducible how many steps it will take for one value to go to another in $x$ steps.

An easy way to see if a markov chain is aperiodic is to look if the diagonal of the matrix of probability contains a non zero number. While it does mean that if there is a non zero value that the markov chain is aperiodic it does not mean that the opposite is true if there is all zeroes.

**Limiting distributions** means that the markov chain converges on some specific value or values that are not all the values.

To find the distribution the method can be used to assume on of the value’s probablity when doing this the other probabilities related to the first one can be deduced. When doing this when the total probability is known the results can be divided untill it is met.

**Stochastic matrix** is a matrix used for probablity. This means that each row sums up to a total of 1 (100%).