# 2023-10-09

This class will be about predicting random processes that can be converted into mathematical calculations. This is good because a computer can use a mathematical calculations and run it a great number of times.

Preknowledge about

- Matrices
- Vectors
- Linear transformations
- R language

Good to look at **EPRST**

To be able to do the lab exam, half of the points of the final exam are needed.

After lab sessions send results to teacher for feedback (not graded).

A sample space is annotated with the greek letter for Ohm **Ω** which is all the possible outcomes. For instance when throwing a coin three times in a row all possible outcomes would be

**Ω = { HHH, HHT, HTH, THH, HTT, TTH, TTT}**

In all the possibilities two subsets are given **A** which includes when heads are happening twice and **B** when tails happens only once this results in

$A \subset \Omega$

$B \subset \Omega$

$A \cap B$

$A \cup B \subset \Omega$

When using this it is quite easy to calculate what the odds are that within three throws you will find subset **A** or **B**. It becomes harder when we increase the amount of throws from **6** to $**\infty$** and change the subset we want to find to what are the odds that we throw heads once. This will result in a table that looks like

| X | H | TH | TTH | TTTH | … |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 1/2 | 1/4 | 1/8 | 1/16 | … |

This will result in the probably of heads happening once in infinite throws approaching 1.

Now if we try to calculate what the odds are that it happens in an even amount of throws we can see that we have to add the odds of

$1/4 + 1/16 + 1/64 + ... \approx 1/3$

Measurements can be independent or dependent. Something is independent if each measurement has no influence on the other measurements. For instance coin flipping. Each subsequent coin toss still has a 50/50 chance of each value appearing. Something is dependent if we throw a dice and we only report if a new unique value has appeared in the set this means that if 1 is thrown then the next values will be less since 1 won’t be unique anymore. This is of course a very simple example but generally this is what it means.

# Markov Chain

Within the markov chain only the past value is dependent on the value that is next. For instance when predicting the fourth move when playing a game with a dice and spaces on a board. The only important position is the position after the third move. The first and second move do not matter since they do not change the probability of the fourth move.