# 2023-12-04

## Summary

This lecture was mostly about PGFs and how to use them to calculate the probablity of certain values in a random process. It seems like the coming lectures will be about this topic.

## Notes

**Discrete random variables** only count without fractions or with a set length between each steps, **continuous random variables** can be divided infinitely into fractions.For the probablity of a value falling in to a range $P(X \in A) = \sum_{x \in A} P(X = x)$ which means add all the probablities of each possible values that falls into the range. For instance if you have the probablity of a dice falling into one of it’s six values the $P(X \in (-1, 2.5])$ is the same as the probablity of the dice being 1 or 2 since those are the only possible values that the dice can get which is inside of the set.

$Ex$ is the expected value which is the mean for instance when flipping a coin with $\alpha = [-1, 1]$ the expected value will always be $0$ while $0$ can never be achieved but it is the mean.

To calculate the variable $Var X = E(X^2) - (EX)^2$

When this is calculated the Standard deviation is calculated the same as in other ways 
$std = \sqrt{Var X}$

This is calculated by calculating the $EX$ which is calculated by taking the mean which is done by calculating $value_1 * probablity_1 + value_2 * probablity_2 + value_3 * probablity_3 + …$.

**PGF** is the probability generating function. In the description it goes to infinity but in many instances the set of possible values is not infinite so if the generating function goes past calculating the probability of these values occuring it will always result in 0 so it can stop at the max value that can be achieved.

The probablity genrating function is notated by 
$G_x(s) = P(X = s)$
$G_x’(s) = \sum_{k=1}^{\infin} ks^{k-1}P(X = k) = P(X = s + 1)$
$G_x’'(s) = \sum_{k=1}^{\infin} k(k-1)s^{k-2}P(X = k) = 2P(X = s + 2)$

The independence is also important when calculating the probablity of some values producing a value. This is because otherwise a probability like $\mathbb{P}(x_1 + x_2 = 0) = \mathbb{P}(x_1 = 0, x_2 = 0)$ cannot be done since the variables influence each other if they are dependent.

If the generating probablity function is trying to get the value with $x = 1$ then $G_x’(1) = \mathbb{E}x$.

**Branching process** is a process where a process can generate a more processes or can reduce itself to no process. This influences how to calculate the probablity.