# Midterm

**Transition matrix** the transition matrix of a markov chain is a matrix describing the probabilty (from 0 to 1) of state i moving to state j within the matrix. So for the first row it describes the state 0 when the values are {0, 1} going to 0 in the first column and going to 1 in the second column. This can be scaled up for markov chains with more than two values.

**Reducible matrix** a redducible matrix is a matrix where not all values are reachable from each value. This means that in some instances when the markov chain leaves a value it can never return or a value can never even be reached from a specific value.

**Irreducible matrix** an irreducible matrix is a matrix that does not get stuck on a set of values that are not all values of possible in the markov chain.

**Periodic matrix** a matrtix is periodic if it always returns to the same value after a number of steps which is constant. This does not mean however that a periodic matrix must be irreducible it can also be periodic on a part of the values in the markov chain.

**Aperiodic matrix** is a matrix that does not get stuck on a specific cycle of values and keeps ocellating with a random number of steps

**Regular matrix** a regular matrix has three properties. It is a square matrix meaning that the size is always n x n. It is irreducible meaning that all states can be reached and returned to. It is positive.

**Limiting distribution** the limiting distribution of a transition matrix is the matrix that the transition matrix converges to when the power is raised to a high power. 
To calculate this use $[\pi_1, \pi_2]{\begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{bmatrix}} = [\pi_1, \pi_2]$ and knowing $\pi_1 + \pi_2 = 1$ the probability of each value can be calculated. Since $\pi_1 + \pi_2 = 1$ when entering an imaginary value of 1 for $\pi_1$ or $\pi_2$ the relation of both values to each other can be calculated. When doing this a value above or below zero is calculated for $\pi_1 + \pi_2$ which can then be reduced to one by doing $\pi_1 = {\pi_1 \above{1pt} \pi_1 + \pi_2}$ and $\pi_2 = {\pi_2 \above{1pt} \pi_1 + \pi_2}$ this same method can be used for bigger matrices by adding extra $\pi$ values.

**Stationary distribution** a stationary distribution is a distribution where the probability does not change after each step of the matrix.

**Communication class** the communication class is a sequence of states that a markov chain can reach from each of the states in the sequence.

**Transient state** is a state that with infinite steps can eventually not be returned to.

**Recurrent state** is a state that with infinite steps can always be returned to.

**GCD** is the greatest common divisor and is used to calculate the period of a state returning to the same state in n steps. Something to keep in mind is that a state can return to itself in 3 steps but also in 4, 5, 6, …, n. The period is still 1 since the greatest common divisor is still 1. When the steps it can return to itself are 3, 6, 9, …, 3n the period will be 3 since the greatest common divisor is 3.

**Period** is the amount of steps after a while it can return to one. If the probablity is above 0 the period 1 one and the markov chain is aperiodic.

**Range notation** the range notation can be done in multiple ways, lets say [0, 10] which means 0 to 10 also including 0 and 10 in the range. (0, 10) which means from 0 to 10 but excluding 0 and 10 from the range and [0, 10) which combines the two which is a range from 0 to 10, including 0 and excluding 10 from the range.

**Poisson distributions** is notated with ${\lambda^k \above{1pt} k!} * e^{-\lambda}$ where $\lambda$ is the mean rate of change and $k$ is the number of events.

**Exponential distribution** is notated with $e^{-\lambda t}$

**Stochastic** means random so a stochastic process is a random process

**Expected value** the expected value can be calculated by $E(N_t) = \lambda t$ and $E(N) = \lambda$.