# 2024-02-28

For a programming language to be known as a high level language it needs to have the following features

- Localised variables
- Argument passing
- Subroutine (methods) calls and returns
- Operations on data
- Loops and conditional operators

These languages can be used to create programs that run as a process using threads.

- Program: an algorithm and the data it is using
- Task or process: a running program
- Thread: a running instance within a task. It shares it’s data with the task. Threads can also access data of another thread within the same process

The memory that a task uses can be one of the following classes:

- Code: the instructions of the program
- Static data: constants and read only variables
- Dynamic automatic data: automatically allocated data that lives on the stack
- Dynamic controlled data: created and destroyed by the programmer using malloc and free for instance within C

These are all parts that can be changed by the user of the system

### Symbolic representation of instructions

The instruction and data in memory are stored as binary. This is called machine language, but is not very human-readable. The symbolic representation that is used nowadays for this is called assembly language or assembler. This is a very basic way of interacting with a computer. It is a literal translation of controlling the computer and needs to be different for each processor architecture.

A line in assembly language is constructed as following. The instruction name and then the argument specification.

### Program counter

The program counter is a register holding the address of the next instruction that has to be run after the current instruction, it is incremented during the fetching of the instruction that lives in the register.

### Stack

The stack is used to store call argument, return traces and local variable.