# 2024-03-04

A stack is mostly called full descending. This is because the stack pointer which points to the current lowest memory address in the stack decrements.

the stack pointer is abbreviated with SP

A problem that occurs often is that during the running of instructions the data on the stack changes. This is handled well by the compiler and debugger, but might be hard to handle for a programmer.

While a stack pointer points at the top of the stack, the frame pointer points to the start of the arguments used in a subroutine. this means that if the items on the stack change it’s location can also change.

Within x86 intel architecture some names are changed, when refering to the frame pointer the name, base pointer is used. Just like the name program counter is not used but the name instruction pointer.

This is the reason why the variable `esp` is very useful which refers to the top of the stack. To access variables that are on the top of stack `esp+n` can be used to refer to these. By refering to the data like this it is irrelevant what other data lives on the stack since `esp`  always points to the top of the stack. This only works however if other programs are not editing the data on the stack at the same time. Otherwise the stack pointer is used by setting `MOV ebp, esp` which sets the value of `ebp` to the current value of `esp` which is the top of stack at that moment.

# Lecture 4: Structure of the programming model

In computer architecture in the past there were computers that did not contain registers (aside from the needed registers for the program counter, stack pointer and address register. These computer stored all data in memory which was slow.

There also exists something called the minimal register set which contains the minimum amount of registers to run high level languages. It has 4 registers

A small set of general purpose registers computer contains 6 to 8 registers. An example is a x86 32bit mode device. All registers can be used for different purposes.

The registers in a computer are used to store data or work as accumulator. Aside from the special ones which are used as the stack and frame pointers. And the source and destination pointers.

Most 64 bit systems nowadays are called big register sets they have 16-32 registers. This amount of registers is important since it can use a lot more registers for addition.

In computer science L-value is the lefthand value in an assignment, this is the value that is not changed.

There are different adddressing modes, which means different things

- register direct: an argument that lives in a register on the stack
- immediate: data value contained in the instruction

## Homework

Wrote a C program and compile it to assembly and look at it.