# 2023-10-17

We can try and measure what the gender spread is within the lecture, even when taking the list of students and taking the percentage from this, this will not result in a precise value since not every student will attend the lecture.

When calculating the probability of a specific number in real life instances this will in most cases end in a probability of 0 since the value has to be exactly this number. This is why ranges are used.

The function to calculate if a value is between two value 

$f(x) = P(c \in C : x_1 \leq X \leq x_2) = \int_{x_2}^{x_1} p(x)dx$

Meanwhile the functions to see if the length is smaller than $x$ value the following calculation is used

$F(x) = P(c \in C : X < x) = \int_{-\infty}^1 p(x)dx$

Within math the $~$~ is used to show that something is comparable to but not equal.

- Bayes rules, bayes decision, learn about bayes!
- Probability, expected value, etc.
- Gaussian distribution is the same as a normal distribution and is equal to a distribution described by a bell curve.
- $\sigma$ stands for standaard deviation which means
- $\mu$ stands for the mean value of a dataset so for instance for a dataset $x = (4, 5, 4, 6)$ the mean would be calculated by $(4 + 5 + 4 + 6) / 4 = 19 / 4 = 4.75$ so $\mu = 4.75$ for $x$

Why is $P(c_1 | x) \sim P(x | c_1) P(x)$

When trying to classify a matrix can be used where columns are $c_1$ and $c_2$ and rows are $\alpha_1$ and $\alpha_2$ we can show this as $\begin{bmatrix}\emptyset & \lambda_{12} \\ \lambda_{21} & \emptyset \end{bmatrix}$ the matrix looks like this typically since when the right decision is made this will result in an empty set of errors. This is why the matrix has a diagonal of $\emptyset$.

$ln$ in math stands for $ln(x) = y$ where $y$ is the answer of what is $e^y = x$ where $e$ is euler’s number.

To calaculate the standard deviation the following is done.

1. Get dataset for instance grades [6,7,8,6,9,6]
2. Calculate the average by adding all values and dividing them by the amount of values $(6 + 7 + 8 + 6 + 9 + 6) / 6 = 42 / 6 = 7$
3. Calculate the squared difference by subtracting the average from each value and squaring the result $(6 - 7)^2 + (7 - 7)^2 + (8 - 7)^2 + (6 - 7)^2 + (9 - 7)^2 + (6 - 7)^2 = 8$
4. Calculate the variance by dividing the squared difference by the amount of datapoint minus one value. $8/(6 - 1) = 8/5 = 1.6$ 
5. Finally the deviation is the square root of the variance $\sqrt{1.6} \approx 1.2649$